[1.18.x] Hitchhiker's Guide to All Things Recipes (#420)
MinecraftForge/Documentation: docs/datagen/server/recipes.md

### ShapedRecipeBuilder

`ShapedRecipeBuilder` is used to generate shaped recipes. The builder can be initialized via `#shaped`. The recipe group, input symbol pattern, symbol definition of ingredients, and the recipe unlock criteria can be specified before saving.

```java
// In RecipeProvider#buildCraftingRecipes(writer)
ShapedRecipeBuilder builder = ShapedRecipeBuilder.shaped(result)
  .pattern("a a") // Create recipe pattern
  .define('a', item) // Define what the symbol represents
  .unlockedBy("criteria", criteria) // How the recipe is unlocked
  .save(writer); // Add data to builder
```

#### Additional Validation Checks

Shaped recipes have some additional validation checks performed before building:

* A pattern must be defined and take in more than one item.
* All pattern rows must be the same width.
* A symbol cannot be defined more than once.
* The space character (`' '`) is reserved for representing no item in a slot and, as such, cannot be defined.
* A pattern must use all symbols defined by the user.
* A criteria besides from using the recipe must be specified to unlock the recipe.

### ShapelessRecipeBuilder

> `ShapelessRecipeBuilder` is used to generate shapeless recipes. The builder can be initialized via `#shapeless`. The recipe group, input ingredients, and how the recipe is unlocked can be specified before saving.

Reviewer: Parallelism as per https://github.com/MinecraftForge/Documentation/pull/420#discussion_r845640222 (please also repeat this for the following sections):
```suggestion
`ShapelessRecipeBuilder` is used to generate shapeless recipes. The builder can be initialized via `#shapeless`. The recipe group, input ingredients, and the recipe unlock criteria can be specified before saving.
```

Recipe Generation
=================

Recipes can be generated for a mod by subclassing `RecipeProvider` and overriding `#buildCraftingRecipes`. A recipe is supplied for data generation once a `FinishedRecipe` view is accepted by the consumer. `FinishedRecipe`s can either be created and supplied manually or, for convenience, created using a `RecipeBuilder`.

After implementation, the provider must be [added][datagen] to the `DataGenerator`.

`RecipeBuilder`
---------------

`RecipeBuilder` is a convenience implementation for creating `FinishedRecipe`s to generate. It provides basic definitions for unlocking, grouping, saving, and getting the result of a recipe. This is done through `#unlockedBy`, `#group`, `#save`, and `#getResult` respectively.

!!! important

>     [`ItemStack` outputs][stack] in recipes is not supported within vanilla recipe builders for `RecipeProvider`. A `FinishedRecipe` must be built in a different manner for existing vanilla recipe serializers to generate this data.

Reviewer: Small grammatical issue:
```suggestion
    [`ItemStack` outputs][stack] in recipes are not supported within vanilla recipe builders for `RecipeProvider`. A `FinishedRecipe` must be built in a different manner for existing vanilla recipe serializers to generate this data.
```

!!! warning

>     The item results being generated must have a valid `CreativeModeTab` specified; otherwise, a `NullPointerException` will be thrown. If no category accurately represents the item and no tab should be created, set the `#tab` property during item initialization to `CreativeModeTab#TAB_SEARCH`.

Reviewer: Why `TAB_SEARCH`?

Author: It is the only category that can view all items within the creative inventory. As such, if no item is applicable for any tab and the user doesn't want to create a custom tab, it would make sense that it would be found in at least that location, hence the setting.

Reviewer: Are there any possibly unwanted side-effects with using the search tab?

Author: No, creative tabs are populated using `Item#fillItemCategory` which performs a check called `#allowedIn` which determines whether or not the item can appear in the creative inventory. If the creative tab is not null, then it will populate with the item if the tab is equal to the set category or the search tab. As such, the only thing this would affect is that the OR check for creative tab would essentially be the same.

You can verify this is a workspace as well.

Reviewer: Hmmm, looking at the code which generates the recipes shows that the output location of the generated recipe JSON uses the creative mode tab of the resulting item for convenient grouping: `new ResourceLocation(recipeId.getNamespace(), "recipes/" + this.result.getItemCategory().getRecipeFolderName() + "/" + recipeId.getPath())`.

This means that a recipe whose result item's tab is set to the `SEARCH` creative mode tab will be placed under `recipes/search/`, which may be an unwanted side-effect.

Author: Unwanted or not, you cannot generate a recipe using the builder without a creative tab, which I agree should be the case. If it gets generated into that folder as a result, it would make sense that it would belong there.

Reviewer: Is it good practice to add items to the search tab, such that the item can only appear in the creative menu through the search tab and no other tab? Are there cases in which a mod has an item which does not belong on normal creative tabs (whether vanilla or modded), but they wish to add a crafting recipe for?

Author: This is specifically dealing with a case where a modder willingly decides to hide their item from the creative inventory but makes it obtainable in survival, so this is my opinion on how to handle this unrecommended edge case. As for the second point, I address that in the [PR that attempts to change that behavior](https://github.com/MinecraftForge/MinecraftForge/pull/8511#issuecomment-1066870648).

### ShapedRecipeBuilder

> `ShapedRecipeBuilder` is used to generate shaped recipes. The builder can be initialized via `#shaped`. The recipe group, input symbol pattern, symbol definition of ingredients, and how the recipe is unlocked can be specified before saving.

Reviewer: Perhaps it may be good to note somewhere here that these factory methods are meant to be statically imported.

Also, adding parallelism for that third item in the last sentence would be good for readability.
```suggestion
`ShapedRecipeBuilder` is used to generate shaped recipes. The builder can be initialized via `#shaped`. The recipe group, input symbol pattern, symbol definition of ingredients, and the recipe unlock criteria can be specified before saving.
```

> The advancement criteria for having the recipe is added and ORed together with all other added criteria.

Reviewer: Are there no other more natural-sounding alternatives to `ORed`?

Author: Probably, I just need to swap around the words.

```java
// In RecipeProvider#buildCraftingRecipes(writer)
ShapedRecipeBuilder builder = ShapedRecipeBuilder.shaped(result);
// Add data to builder
builder.save(writer);

> ```

Reviewer: Perhaps this should be formatted to show the fluent design of the recipe builder methods, which allow for chaining calls up to the final `save` call.

#### Validation Checks

* A pattern must be defined and take in more than one item.

> * All pattern rows must be the same width.

Reviewer: It might or might not be worth specifying that the pattern row strings only need be the same -- that is, a pattern row may not be fully specified (`" # "`) or even blank, as long as the definition of the row as a string literal matches the length of all other rows as string literals.

Author: I feel like that's more confusing. The pattern is still the same width regardless and would be fully specified. And the point below about whitespace would clear up the definition to count it towards the width of the pattern.

* A symbol cannot be defined more than once.

> * The whitespace (' ') symbol is reserved and, as such, cannot be defined.

Reviewer: The term "whitespace" is taken to represent any blank vertical or horizontal space, which includes tabs and spaces. In this case, it is better to specify this as the "space character" instead. Additionally, the space character in quotes should be in monospace and after the word symbol/character.

> * A pattern must only use all defined symbols.

Reviewer: The word "all" makes the meaning of the sentence a bit unclear to me: does this mean that the pattern must only use those symbols defined previously, or that the pattern must make use of all symbols defined previously?

Author: A pattern must use all symbols defined by the user. If the user does not use a symbol or does not define a symbol, then an error is thrown. Fixed the wording a bit to clarify.

> * A criteria besides from using the recipe must be specified to unlock the recipe.

Reviewer: There should be a note or tip about the conventional use of `InventoryChangeTrigger` as this criteria with the result item.

### ShapelessRecipeBuilder

`ShapelessRecipeBuilder` is used to generate shapeless recipes. The builder can be initialized via `#shapeless`. The recipe group, input ingredients, and how the recipe is unlocked can be specified before saving.

The advancement criteria for having the recipe is added and ORed together with all other added criteria.

```java
// In RecipeProvider#buildCraftingRecipes(writer)
ShapelessRecipeBuilder builder = ShapelessRecipeBuilder.shapeless(result);
// Add data to builder
builder.save(writer);
```

> #### Validation Checks

Reviewer: Should these be individual sections, or a paragraph followed by a list in the parent section? Since most of these sections (with the notable exception of the first section) contain one bullet point, the use of a whole section sounds a bit too much to me.

SimpleCookingRecipeBuilder builder = SimpleCookingRecipeBuilder.smelting(input, result, experience, cookingTime);
// Add data to builder
builder.save(writer);
```

#### Validation Checks

* A criteria besides from using the recipe must be specified to unlock the recipe.

### SingleItemRecipeBuilder

`SingleItemRecipeBuilder` is used to generate stonecutting recipes. Additionally, custom single item recipes using a serializer like `SingleItemRecipe$Serializer` can also be data generated using this builder. The builder can be initialized via `#stonecutting` or through the constructor respectively. The recipe group and how the recipe is unlocked can be specified before saving.

The advancement criteria for having the recipe is added and ORed together with all other added criteria.

```java
// In RecipeProvider#buildCraftingRecipes(writer)
SingleItemRecipeBuilder builder = SingleItemRecipeBuilder.stonecutting(input, result);
// Add data to builder
builder.save(writer);
```

#### Validation Checks

* A criteria besides from using the recipe must be specified to unlock the recipe.

Non-`RecipeBuilder` Builders
----------------------------

> Some recipe builders do not implement `RecipeBuilder` due to lacking  features used by all previously mentioned recipes.

Reviewer: Extra whitespace:
```suggestion
Some recipe builders do not implement `RecipeBuilder` due to lacking features used by all previously mentioned recipes.
```

After all recipes have been specified, advancements can be added for each recipe at the end using `#generateAdvancement`. Alternatively, the conditional advancement can be set using `#setAdvancement`.

```java
// In RecipeProvider#buildCraftingRecipes(writer)
ConditionalRecipe.builder()
  // Add the conditions for the recipe
  .addCondition(...)
  // Add recipe to return when conditions are true
  .addRecipe(...)

  // Add the next conditions for the next recipe
  .addCondition(...)
  // Add next recipe to return when the next conditions are true
  .addRecipe(...)

  // Create conditional advancement which uses the conditions
  // and unlocking advancement in the recipes above
  .generateAdvancement()
  .build(writer, name);
```

### IConditionBuilder

To simplify adding conditions to conditional recipes without having to construct the instances of each condition instance manually, the extended `RecipeProvider` can implement `IConditionBuilder`. The interface adds methods to easily construct condition instances.

```java
// In ConditionalRecipe$Builder#addCondition
(
  // If either 'examplemod:example_item'
  // OR 'examplemod:example_item2' exists
  // AND
  // NOT FALSE

>   and(

Reviewer: There should probably be a note that these are static imports of the methods in `IConditionBuilder`.

Author: They are not static imports, they are defaulted methods as a result of implentation.
